docs: added a page on dongles (#2525)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/development/hardware-integration/dongle.mdx

- It is easier to connect to the host device since dongles are typically connected via USB.

Disadvantages:

- An extra [board](../../faq.md#what-is-a-board) is needed (any BLE-capable board will work).
- The keyboard becomes unusable without the dongle.

Depending on how the dongle is used, there are some additional [latency considerations](../../features/split-keyboards.md#latency-considerations) to keep in mind.
The addition of the dongle adds an extra "hop" for the former central, increasing its latency to that of a peripheral. The other parts are unchanged latency-wise. There is also a commonly occurring case where the peripherals benefit.
Assuming the dongle is connected to USB and the former central would have been connected via bluetooth to the host if the dongle wasn't present:

- The former central will have its latency increased by about 1ms from the extra USB "hop"
- The other parts will have their average latency _decreased_ by 6.5ms from the replacement of a BLE "hop" with a "USB" hop.

As a result, for this common use case the average latency of the keyboard decreases.

## Adding a Dongle

> The approach taken to adding a dongle is _generally_ always the same[^1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach taken to adding a dongle is _generally_ the same[^1].
```
The two words seem conflicting.

> Whether your keyboard consists of a board and a shield or is just a board is irrelevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether your keyboard consists of a [board and a shield](index.mdx#boards--shields) or is just a board is irrelevant.
```

Reviewer: It would also be nice to add a sentence noting that the procedure applies whether this is a custom keyboard or a keyboard already supported in ZMK's hardware list.

Reviewer: > It would also be nice to add a sentence noting that the procedure applies whether this is a custom keyboard or a keyboard already supported in ZMK's hardware list.

I think you might have missed this, what do you think?

Author: I think the phrasing would be something like "whether your keyboard is in-tree of ZMK or is external to it". I'm not sure I really want to make that distinction though, since it implies to me that there are cases where there is a significant difference. I could be convinced otherwise if you think it'd be worthwhile.

Reviewer: On a second read, it seems fine to skip it.

To add a dongle, you will create a simplified form of a [new shield](new-shield.mdx).

> The approach described below assumes the dongle will not have any keys assigned to itself, so it will not work for that scenario. If you want to understand the details of how it all works better, please read through the [new shield guide](new-shield.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach described below assumes the dongle will not have any keys assigned to itself, so it will not work for that scenario.
If you want to understand the details of how it all works better, please read through the [new shield guide](new-shield.mdx).
```
For consistency

Next, navigate to the `zmk-config/boards/shields` directory. Create a subdirectory called `my_keyboard`, if one doesn't already exist. Unless otherwise specified, the below files should all be placed in said folder.

### Kconfig Files

#### Kconfig.shield

Make a file called `Kconfig.shield`, if one does not exist already. Add the following lines to it, replacing `SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE` and `my_keyboard_dongle` according to your keyboard:

```kconfig title="Kconfig.shield"
# No whitespace after the comma or in the keyboard name!
config SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE
    def_bool $(shields_list_contains,my_keyboard_dongle)
```

#### Kconfig.defconfig

Make a file called `Kconfig.defconfig`, if one does not exist already. Add the following lines to it where `SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE` should match the previous section:

```kconfig title="Kconfig.defconfig"
if SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE

# Max 16 characters in keyboard name
config ZMK_KEYBOARD_NAME
    default "My Board"

config ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL
    default y

config ZMK_SPLIT
    default y

# Set this to the number of peripherals your dongle will have.

> # For a unibody, this would be 1. If you have left and right halves, set it to two, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For a unibody, this would be 1. If you have left and right halves, set it to 2, etc.
```

config ZMK_SPLIT_BLE_CENTRAL_PERIPHERALS
    default 1

# Set this to ZMK_SPLIT_BLE_CENTRAL_PERIPHERALS + your desired number of BT profiles (default is 5)
config BT_MAX_CONN
    default 6

# Set this to the same number as BT_MAX_CONN
config BT_MAX_PAIRED
    default 6

endif
```

### Dongle Overlay File

> Make a file called `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` (renamed as appropriate).
> This file will include your keyboard's matrix transform and physical layout, allowing it to map key press events from the peripherals to behaviors.
> 
> Create it with the following lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file called `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` (renamed as appropriate).
This file will include your keyboard's matrix transform and physical layout, allowing it to map key press events from the peripherals to behaviors.

Add the following lines to the file you created:
```

```dts title="my_keyboard_dongle.overlay"
#include <dt-bindings/zmk/matrix_transform.h>

/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
    };

    mock_kscan: mock_kscan_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,kscan-mock";
        columns = <0>;
        rows = <0>;
        events = <0>;
    };
};
```

You will now need to find and copy your keyboard's matrix transform into the `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file.

#### Matrix transform

Navigate to the directory defining your keyboard (in-tree keyboards found [here](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/tree/main/app/boards)) and look through the [devicetree files](../../config/index.md) for nodes with `compatible = "zmk,matrix-transform";`.
This should look something like this:

```dts
    default_transform: keymap_transform_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,matrix-transform";
        columns = <14>;
        rows = <5>;

        map = <
            // Lots of RC(r,c) macros
        >;
    };
```

> Copy this node into your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file. Take care to put it under the root node (the `/ { \* Stuff *\ };` node).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy this node into your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file. Take care to put it under the root node (the `/ { /* Stuff */ };` node).
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy this node into your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file. Take care to put it under the root node (the `/ { ... };` node).
```
I like this a bit better, up to you.

If there are multiple matrix transformations, copy the one that matches your keyboard's layout.

Make a note of the label that the transform has, it will be used later. In the example the label is `default_transform`.

#### Physical layout

A full physical layout is necessary to allow your dongle to be used with [ZMK Studio](../../features/studio.md).
If your keyboard is not Studio-ready or you have no interest in using ZMK Studio with your dongle, then this section is simplified significantly.

<Tabs
    groupId="studio-ready"
    defaultValue="studio"
    values={[
      { label: "Dongle with Studio", value: "studio" },
      { label: "Dongle without Studio", value: "nostudio" }
    ]}
  >
<TabItem value="studio">

You will need to find your keyboard's physical layout, much like finding the matrix transform.
Depending on your keyboard, the physical layout could be found in a variety of locations. Look for a node with `compatible = "zmk,physical-layout";`.
There are three commonly found possibilities:

- The physical layout is found in a file called `my_keyboard-layouts.dtsi`
- The physical layout is found in the same file as the matrix transform and chosen node

> - The physical layout is imported from ZMK's shared layouts - `#include <layouts/<stuff>.dtsi>` can be found at the top of one of the devicetree files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The physical layout is imported from ZMK's shared layouts - `#include <layouts/<layout_name>.dtsi>` can be found at the top of one of the devicetree files.
```
I am not a big fan of "stuff", but not a big deal either way.

<Tabs
    groupId="layout-locations"
    defaultValue="layouts"
    values={[
      { label: "Layouts File", value: "layouts" },
      { label: "Base File", value: "base" },
      { label: "Imported", value: "imported" }
    ]}
  >
<TabItem value="layouts">
Copy the file into your dongle's folder. Then import the file, assign the matrix transform to it, and select it in the `chosen` node:

```dts
#import "my_keyboard-layouts.dtsi"

&physical_layout0 {
    transform = <&default_transform>;
};

/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
    };
};
```

> Make sure that the labels `physical_layout0` and `default_transform` match those of the physical layout node and the matrix transform respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that the labels `physical_layout0` and `default_transform` match those of the physical layout node defined in the file and the matrix transform respectively.
```

> If there are multiple physical layouts in the file, you will need to copy over all of the remaining matrix transformations and assign them similarly.

Reviewer: Is this necessary if only one layout is to be used? If not, we can qualify it a bit:
```suggestion
If there are multiple physical layouts in the file and you want to be able to switch layouts using ZMK Studio, you will need to copy over all of the remaining matrix transformations and assign them similarly.
```

Author: If multiple layouts are present, then they'll refer to different matrix transforms resulting in build errors. I feel telling the user just to copy all the transforms over is simpler and more likely to produce something that works.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="base">
Copy the physical layout node into your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file. Make sure the matrix transform is assigned to it, and select it in the `chosen` node.

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
    };

    physical_layout0: physical_layout_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,physical-layout";
        display-name = "Default Layout";
        transform = <&default_transform>;

>         keys = //Long list of keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        keys = <...>; // Long list of key positions
```
This is similar to how it is used in https://zmk.dev/docs/development/hardware-integration/physical-layouts#multiple-physical-layouts

    };
};
```

Make sure that the labels `physical_layout0` and `default_transform` match those of the physical layout node and the matrix transform respectively.

If there are multiple physical layouts, you need only copy the one that applies to your keyboard.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="imported">
Include your desired layout at the top of the file. Then assign your matrix transform to it, taking care to match up the node labels correctly.

```dts

> #include <layouts/<stuff>.dtsi>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#include <layouts/<layout_name>.dtsi>
```
Re: above comment.

&physical_layout0 {
    transform = <&default_transform>;
};
```

> Your node label will never be `physical_layout0`, make sure to adjust it accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case your node label will _not_ be `physical_layout0`, make sure to adjust it accordingly.
```

Finally, select your physical layout in the chosen node.

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &kscan0;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
    };
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="nostudio">
Add a barebones [physical layout](physical-layouts.md) without the `keys` property to your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file.

```dts
/ {
    physical_layout0: physical_layout_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,physical-layout";
        display-name = "Default Layout";
        transform = <&default_transform>;
    };
};
```

> Make sure that the `transform` property uses the same label as your matrix transform. Then select the physical layout in the same `chosen` node as previously written:
> 
> ```dts
> / {
>     chosen {
>         zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
>         zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
>     };
> };
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Make sure that the `transform` property uses the same label as your matrix transform. Then select the physical layout in the same `chosen` node that was previously created:

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;  // New item added
    };
};
```
````
Maybe a comment like this?

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Building the Firmware

:::warning
Before flashing your new firmware, you need to flash `settings_reset` [firmware](../../troubleshooting/connection-issues.mdx#acquiring-a-reset-uf2) on all devices to ensure they can pair to each other.
:::

Add the appropriate lines to your `build.yml` file to build the firmware for your dongle. Also add some CMake arguments using `cmake-args` to the existing parts of your keyboard, turning them into peripherals for your dongle.

```yaml
include:
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Your other keyboard parts here
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Change the board appropriately, you can use any board
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: my_keyboard_dongle
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: settings_reset
  # Add these cmake-args to the peripherals you wish to use with the dongle
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: my_keyboard

>     cmake-args: -DZMK_SPLIT=y -DZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL=n

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    cmake-args: -DCONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT=y -DCONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL=n
```

```

If you ever want to "undongle" your keyboard, simply remove these CMake arguments and flash the resulting firmware (after a `settings_reset`).

> [^1]: If you have a custom dongle that uses an onboard MCU, then you will need to take a slightly different approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^1]: If you have a custom dongle that uses an onboard MCU, then you will need to take a slightly different approach that isn't currently documented.
```

config BT_MAX_CONN
    default 6

# Set this to the same number as BT_MAX_CONN
config BT_MAX_PAIRED
    default 6

endif
```

### Dongle Overlay File

Create a file called `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` (renamed as appropriate).
This file will include your keyboard's matrix transform and physical layout, allowing it to map key press events from the peripherals to behaviors.

Add the following lines to the file you created:

```dts title="my_keyboard_dongle.overlay"
#include <dt-bindings/zmk/matrix_transform.h>

/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
    };

    mock_kscan: mock_kscan_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,kscan-mock";
        columns = <0>;
        rows = <0>;
        events = <0>;
    };
};
```

You will now need to find and copy your keyboard's matrix transform into the `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file.

#### Matrix transform

Navigate to the directory defining your keyboard (in-tree keyboards found [here](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/tree/main/app/boards)) and look through the [devicetree files](../../config/index.md) for nodes with `compatible = "zmk,matrix-transform";`.

> This should look something like this:

Reviewer 2: As someone new to ZMK and following this guide step-by-step, this bit confuses me.

My ZMK is for the Sofle with Nice Nano v2.

In the boards folder, I can find the [nice nano](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/tree/main/app/boards/arm/nice_nano) folder.

I cannot find any nodes with the text `compatible = "zmk,matrix-transform";`.

Am I missing something?

Maybe adding a text saying that the board may not contain the text could help.

Reviewer 2: Ok I found it. Im sorry

Author: Do you think a note saying "for a shield+board keyboard look under boards/shields" would have helped?

```dts
    default_transform: keymap_transform_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,matrix-transform";
        columns = <14>;
        rows = <5>;

        map = <
            // Lots of RC(r,c) macros
        >;
    };
```

> Copy this node into your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file. Take care to put it under the root node (the `/ { ... };` node).

Reviewer 2: > Take care to put it under the root node

Didn't you mean "inside" instead of "under"?

I did not tried to compile it yet, but it "feels" more right to put it contained by the root node.

Or maybe it is just a language barrier because of how I interpret the word "under" as a non native english speaker

Reviewer 2: From what I have tested it should be inside the root node

There are three commonly found possibilities:

- The physical layout is found in a file called `my_keyboard-layouts.dtsi`
- The physical layout is found in the same file as the matrix transform and chosen node
- The physical layout is imported from ZMK's shared layouts - `#include <layouts/<layout_name>.dtsi>` can be found at the top of one of the devicetree files.

<Tabs
    groupId="layout-locations"
    defaultValue="layouts"
    values={[
      { label: "Layouts File", value: "layouts" },
      { label: "Base File", value: "base" },
      { label: "Imported", value: "imported" }
    ]}
  >
<TabItem value="layouts">
Copy the file into your dongle's folder. Then import the file, assign the matrix transform to it, and select it in the `chosen` node:

```dts
#import "my_keyboard-layouts.dtsi"

&physical_layout0 {
    transform = <&default_transform>;
};

/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
    };
};
```

Make sure that the labels `physical_layout0` and `default_transform` match those of the physical layout node defined in the file and the matrix transform respectively.

> If there are multiple physical layouts in the file, you will need to copy over all of the remaining matrix transformations and assign them similarly.

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be better if we put the entire section related to the case of having multiple layouts under a new title?

Something like `#### If there are multiple physical layouts in the file`.

This is because the next topics seem to have no clear connection with the previous one

Look at:
> Copy the physical layout node into your...

Seems like there should be a "In this case," before the text to maintain cohesion.

Or it could be done by a new title that contains all that block.

Without it, I feel that users can get confused to know how far they should follow the instructions

        compatible = "zmk,physical-layout";
        display-name = "Default Layout";
        transform = <&default_transform>;
    };
};
```

Make sure that the `transform` property uses the same label as your matrix transform. Then select the physical layout in the same `chosen` node that was previously created:

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;  // New item added
    };
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Building the Firmware

:::warning
Before flashing your new firmware, you need to flash `settings_reset` [firmware](../../troubleshooting/connection-issues.mdx#acquiring-a-reset-uf2) on all devices to ensure they can pair to each other.
:::

Add the appropriate lines to your `build.yml` file to build the firmware for your dongle. Also add some CMake arguments using `cmake-args` to the existing parts of your keyboard, turning them into peripherals for your dongle.

```yaml
include:
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Your other keyboard parts here
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Change the board appropriately, you can use any board
  - board: nice_nano_v2

>     shield: my_keyboard_dongle

Reviewer 2: What about ZMK Studio?

Should we add cmake-args to make it work?

Something like:
```
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: my_keyboard_dongle
#    cmake-args: -DCONFIG_ZMK_STUDIO=y  # For ZMK Studio to work
```

I may be wrong, because mine is not compiling with that arg and I am trying to figure out why

---
title: Keyboard Dongle
sidebar_label: Keyboard Dongle
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

> A bluetooth dongle can be added to any keyboard running ZMK. The result is a [split keyboard](../../features/split-keyboards.md) with the dongle as ["central"](../../features/split-keyboards.md#central-and-peripheral-roles). There are a number of advantages to adding a dongle, but also some disadvantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bluetooth dongle can be added to any wireless keyboard running ZMK. The result is a [split keyboard](../../features/split-keyboards.md) with the dongle as ["central"](../../features/split-keyboards.md#central-and-peripheral-roles). There are a number of advantages to adding a dongle, but also some disadvantages:
```

Benefits:

- For split keyboards, having the dongle for the "central" role results in [improved battery life](/power-profiler) for the former central part, as it is now a peripheral.
- It is easier to connect to the host device since dongles are typically connected via USB.

Disadvantages:

> - An extra [board](../../faq.md#what-is-a-board) is needed (any BLE-capable board will work).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An extra [board](../../faq.md#what-is-a-board) is needed (any BLE-capable board that ZMK supports will work).
```

    def_bool $(shields_list_contains,my_keyboard_dongle)
```

#### Kconfig.defconfig

Make a file called `Kconfig.defconfig`, if one does not exist already. Add the following lines to it where `SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE` should match the previous section:

```kconfig title="Kconfig.defconfig"
if SHIELD_MY_KEYBOARD_DONGLE

# Max 16 characters in keyboard name
config ZMK_KEYBOARD_NAME
    default "My Board"

config ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL
    default y

config ZMK_SPLIT
    default y

# Set this to the number of peripherals your dongle will have.
# For a unibody, this would be 1. If you have left and right halves, set it to 2, etc.
config ZMK_SPLIT_BLE_CENTRAL_PERIPHERALS
    default 1

# Set this to ZMK_SPLIT_BLE_CENTRAL_PERIPHERALS + your desired number of BT profiles (default is 5)
config BT_MAX_CONN
    default 6

# Set this to the same number as BT_MAX_CONN
config BT_MAX_PAIRED
    default 6

endif
```

### Dongle Overlay File

Create a file called `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` (renamed as appropriate).
This file will include your keyboard's matrix transform and physical layout, allowing it to map key press events from the peripherals to behaviors.

> Add the following lines to the file you created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following lines to the file you created, which uses a dummy kscan for the dongle since it has no keys itself:
```

Finally, select your physical layout in the chosen node.

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &kscan0;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;
    };
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="nostudio">
Add a barebones [physical layout](physical-layouts.md) without the `keys` property to your `my_keyboard_dongle.overlay` file.

```dts
/ {
    physical_layout0: physical_layout_0 {
        compatible = "zmk,physical-layout";
        display-name = "Default Layout";
        transform = <&default_transform>;
    };
};
```

Make sure that the `transform` property uses the same label as your matrix transform. Then select the physical layout in the same `chosen` node that was previously created:

```dts
/ {
    chosen {
        zmk,kscan = &mock_kscan;
        zmk,physical-layout = &physical_layout0;  // New item added
    };
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Building the Firmware

:::warning
Before flashing your new firmware, you need to flash `settings_reset` [firmware](../../troubleshooting/connection-issues.mdx#acquiring-a-reset-uf2) on all devices to ensure they can pair to each other.

> :::

Reviewer: I think it might be better to move this to the end of this section?

Author: I think it's nice to have it at the start of the section, so that it's more chronological.

Reviewer: I thought the same but I imagined flashing reset just before flashing the new, rather than before editing the file.

Author: Realised that a sentence on flashing is probably missing anyway, so I added a sentence and moved the warning underneath. Above the flashing sentence feels odd to read. If you think it's good you're good to merge.

> Add the appropriate lines to your `build.yml` file to build the firmware for your dongle. Also add some CMake arguments using `cmake-args` to the existing parts of your keyboard, turning them into peripherals for your dongle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the appropriate lines to your `build.yml` file to build the firmware for your dongle. Also add some CMake arguments using `cmake-args` to the existing parts of your keyboard, turning them into peripherals for your dongle.[^2]
```

```yaml
include:
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Your other keyboard parts here
  # -----------------------------------------
  # Change the board appropriately, you can use any board
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: my_keyboard_dongle
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: settings_reset
  # Add these cmake-args to the peripherals you wish to use with the dongle
  - board: nice_nano_v2
    shield: my_keyboard
    cmake-args: -DCONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT=y -DCONFIG_ZMK_SPLIT_ROLE_CENTRAL=n
```

To use your dongled keyboard with [ZMK Studio](../../features/studio.md), apply the instructions for [building with Studio](../../features/studio.md#building) to the dongle.

If you ever want to "undongle" your keyboard, simply remove these CMake arguments and flash the resulting firmware (after a `settings_reset`).

> [^1]: If you have a custom dongle that uses an onboard MCU, then you will need to take a slightly different approach that isn't currently documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^1]: If you have a custom dongle that uses an onboard MCU, then you will need to take a slightly different approach that isn't currently documented.
[^2]: If you are building locally, you can append these flags to the end of the [build command](../local-toolchain/build-flash.mdx#cmake-arguments).
```
